PRELUDE TO THE STORMLIGHT ARCHIVE

Kalak rounded a rocky stone ridge and stumbled to a stop before the body
of a dying thunderclast. The enormous stone beast lay on its side,
riblike protrusions from its chest broken and cracked. The monstrosity
was vaguely skeletal in shape, with unnaturally long limbs that sprouted
from granite shoulders. The eyes were deep red spots on the arrowhead
face, as if created by a fire burning deep within the stone. They faded.

Even after all these centuries, seeing a thunderclast up close made
Kalak shiver. The beast’s hand was as long as a man was tall. He’d been
killed by hands like those before, and it hadn’t been pleasant.

Of course, dying rarely was.

He rounded the creature, picking his way more carefully across the
battlefield. The plain was a place of misshapen rock and stone, natural
pillars rising around him, bodies littering the ground. Few plants lived
here.

The stone ridges and mounds bore numerous scars. Some were shattered,
blasted-out sections where Surgebinders had fought. Less frequently, he
passed cracked, oddly shaped hollows where thunderclasts had ripped
themselves free of the stone to join the fray.

Many of the bodies around him were human; many were not. Blood mixed.
Red. Orange. Violet. Though none of the bodies around him stirred, an
indistinct haze of sounds hung in the air. Moans of pain, cries of
grief. They did not seem like the sounds of victory. Smoke curled from
the occasional patches of growth or heaps of burning corpses. Even some
sections of rock smoldered. The Dustbringers had done their work well.

But I survived, Kalak thought, hand to breast as he hastened to the
meeting place. I actually survived this time.

That was dangerous. When he died, he was sent back, no choice. When he
survived the Desolation, he was supposed to go back as well. Back to
that place that he dreaded. Back to that place of pain and fire. What if
he just decided…not to go?

Perilous thoughts, perhaps traitorous thoughts. He hastened on his way.

The place of meeting was in the shadow of a large rock formation, a
spire rising into the sky. As always, the ten of them had decided upon
it before the battle. The survivors would make their way here. Oddly,
only one of the others was waiting for him. Jezrien. Had the other eight
all died? It was possible. The battle had been so furious this time, one
of the worst. The enemy was growing increasingly tenacious.

But no. Kalak frowned as he stepped up to the base of the spire. Seven
magnificent swords stood proudly here, driven point-first into the stone
ground. Each was a masterly work of art, flowing in design, inscribed
with glyphs and patterns. He recognized each one. If their masters had
died, the Blades would have vanished.

These Blades were weapons of power beyond even Shardblades. These were
unique. Precious. Jezrien stood outside the ring of swords, looking
eastward.

“Jezrien?”

The figure in white and blue glanced toward him. Even after all these
centuries, Jezrien looked young, like a man barely into his thirtieth
year. His short black beard was neatly trimmed, though his once-fine
clothing was scorched and stained with blood. He folded his arms behind
his back as he turned to Kalak.

“What is this, Jezrien?” Kalak asked. “Where are the others?”

“Departed.” Jezrien’s voice was calm, deep, regal. Though he hadn’t worn
a crown in centuries, his royal manner lingered. He always seemed to
know what to do. “You might call it a miracle. Only one of us died this
time.”

“Talenel,” Kalak said. His was the only Blade unaccounted for.

“Yes. He died holding that passage by the northern waterway.”

Kalak nodded. Taln had a tendency to choose seemingly hopeless fights
and win them. He also had a tendency to die in the process. He would be
back now, in the place where they went between Desolations. The place of
nightmares.

Kalak found himself shaking. When had he become so weak? “Jezrien, I
can’t return this time.” Kalak whispered the words, stepping up and
gripping the other man’s arm. “I can’t.”

Kalak felt something within him break at the admission. How long had it
been? Centuries, perhaps millennia, of torture. It was so hard to keep
track. Those fires, those hooks, digging into his flesh anew each day.
Searing the skin off his arm, then burning the fat, then driving to the
bone. He could smell it. Almighty, he could smell it!

“Leave your sword,” Jezrien said.

“What?”

Jezrien nodded to the ring of weapons. “I was chosen to wait for you. We
weren’t certain if you had survived. A…a decision has been made. It is
time for the Oathpact to end.”

Kalak felt a sharp stab of horror. “What will that do?”

“Ishar believes that so long as there is one of us still bound to the
Oathpact, it may be enough. There is a chance we might end the cycle of
Desolations.”

Kalak looked into the immortal king’s eyes. Black smoke rose from a
small patch to their left. Groans of the dying haunted them from behind.
There, in Jezrien’s eyes, Kalak saw anguish and grief. Perhaps even
cowardice. This was a man hanging from a cliff by a thread.

Almighty above, Kalak thought. You’re broken too, aren’t you? They all
were.

Kalak turned and walked to the side, where a low ridge overlooked part
of the battlefield.

There were so many corpses, and among them walked the living. Men in
primitive wraps, carrying spears topped by bronze heads. Juxtaposed
between them were others in gleaming plate armor. One group walked past,
four men in their ragged tanned skins or shoddy leather joining a
powerful figure in beautiful silver plate, amazingly intricate. Such a
contrast.

Jezrien stepped up beside him.

“They see us as divinities,” Kalak whispered. “They rely upon us,
Jezrien. We’re all that they have.”

“They have the Radiants. That will be enough.”

Kalak shook his head. “He will not remain bound by this. The enemy. He
will find a way around it. You know he will.”

“Perhaps.” The king of Heralds offered no further explanation.

“And Taln?” Kalak asked. The flesh burning. The fires. The pain over and
over and over…

“Better that one man should suffer than ten,” Jezrien whispered. He
seemed so cold. Like a shadow caused by heat and light falling on
someone honorable and true, casting this black imitation behind.

Jezrien walked back to the ring of swords. His own Blade formed in his
hands, appearing from mist, wet with condensation. “It has been decided,
Kalak. We will go our ways, and we will not seek out one another. Our
Blades must be left. The Oathpact ends now.” He lifted his sword and
rammed it into the stone with the other seven.

Jezrien hesitated, looking at the sword, then bowed his head and turned
away. As if ashamed. “We chose this burden willingly. Well, we can
choose to drop it if we wish.”

“What do we tell the people, Jezrien?” Kalak asked. “What will they say
of this day?”

“It’s simple,” Jezrien said, walking away. “We tell them that they
finally won. It’s an easy enough lie. Who knows? Maybe it will turn out
to be true.”

Kalak watched Jezrien depart across the burned landscape. Finally, he
summoned his own Blade and slammed it into the stone beside the other
eight. He turned and walked in the direction opposite from Jezrien.

And yet, he could not help glancing back at the ring of swords and the
single open spot. The place where the tenth sword should have gone.

The one of them who was lost. The one they had abandoned.

Forgive us, Kalak thought, then left.

 

  Map of Alethkar and surroundings, created by His Majesty Gavilar
  Kholin’s royal surveyors, circa 1167.

  “The love of men is a frigid thing, a mountain stream only three steps
  from the ice. We are his. Oh Stormfather…we are his. It is but a
  thousand days, and the Everstorm comes.”

  —Collected on the first day of the week Palah of the month Shash of
  the year 1171, thirty-one seconds before death. Subject was a darkeyed
  pregnant woman of middle years. The child did not survive.

Szeth-son-son-Vallano, Truthless of Shinovar, wore white on the day he
was to kill a king. The white clothing was a Parshendi tradition,
foreign to him. But he did as his masters required and did not ask for
an explanation.

He sat in a large stone room, baked by enormous firepits that cast a
garish light upon the revelers, causing beads of sweat to form on their
skin as they danced, and drank, and yelled, and sang, and clapped. Some
fell to the ground red-faced, the revelry too much for them, their
stomachs proving to be inferior wineskins. They looked as if they were
dead, at least until their friends carried them out of the feast hall to
waiting beds.

Szeth did not sway to the drums, drink the sapphire wine, or stand to
dance. He sat on a bench at the back, a still servant in white robes.
Few at the treaty-signing celebration noticed him. He was just a
servant, and Shin were easy to ignore. Most out here in the East thought
Szeth’s kind were docile and harmless. They were generally right.

The drummers began a new rhythm. The beats shook Szeth like a quartet of
thumping hearts, pumping waves of invisible blood through the room.
Szeth’s masters—who were dismissed as savages by those in more civilized
kingdoms—sat at their own tables. They were men with skin of black
marbled with red. Parshendi, they were named—cousins to the more docile
servant peoples known as parshmen in most of the world. An oddity. They
did not call themselves Parshendi; this was the Alethi name for them. It
meant, roughly, “parshmen who can think.” Neither side seemed to see
that as an insult.

The Parshendi had brought the musicians. At first, the Alethi lighteyes
had been hesitant. To them, drums were base instruments of the common,
darkeyed people. But wine was the great assassin of both tradition and
propriety, and now the Alethi elite danced with abandon.

Szeth stood and began to pick his way through the room. The revelry had
lasted long; even the king had retired hours ago. But many still
celebrated. As he walked, Szeth was forced to step around Dalinar
Kholin—the king’s own brother—who slumped drunken at a small table. The
aging but powerfully built man kept waving away those who tried to
encourage him to bed. Where was Jasnah, the king’s daughter? Elhokar,
the king’s son and heir, sat at the high table, ruling the feast in his
father’s absence. He was in conversation with two men, a dark-skinned
Azish man who had an odd patch of pale skin on his cheek and a thinner,
Alethi-looking man who kept glancing over his shoulder.

The heir’s feasting companions were unimportant. Szeth stayed far from
the heir, skirting the sides of the room, passing the drummers.
Musicspren zipped through the air around them, the tiny spirits taking
the form of spinning translucent ribbons. As Szeth passed the drummers,
they noted him. They would withdraw soon, along with all of the other
Parshendi.

They did not seem offended. They did not seem angry. And yet they were
going to break their treaty of only a few hours. It made no sense. But
Szeth did not ask questions.

At the edge of the room, he passed rows of unwavering azure lights that
bulged out where wall met floor. They held sapphires infused with
Stormlight. Profane. How could the men of these lands use something so
sacred for mere illumination? Worse, the Alethi scholars were said to be
close to creating new Shardblades. Szeth hoped that was just wishful
boasting. For if it did happen, the world would be changed. Likely in a
way that ended with people in all countries—from distant Thaylenah to
towering Jah Keved—speaking Alethi to their children.

They were a grand people, these Alethi. Even drunk, there was a natural
nobility to them. Tall and well made, the men dressed in dark silk coats
that buttoned down the sides of the chest and were elaborately
embroidered in silver or gold. Each one looked a general on the field.

The women were even more splendid. They wore grand silk dresses, tightly
fitted, the bright colors a contrast to the dark tones favored by the
men. The left sleeve of each dress was longer than the right one,
covering the hand. Alethi had an odd sense of propriety.

Their pure black hair was pinned up atop their heads, either in
intricate weavings of braids or in loose piles. It was often woven with
gold ribbons or ornaments, along with gems that glowed with Stormlight.
Beautiful. Profane, but beautiful.

Szeth left the feasting chamber behind. Just outside, he passed the
doorway into the Beggars’ Feast. It was an Alethi tradition, a room
where some of the poorest men and women in the city were given a feast
complementing that of the king and his guests. A man with a long grey
and black beard slumped in the doorway, smiling foolishly—though whether
from wine or a weak mind, Szeth could not tell.

“Have you seen me?” the man asked with slurred speech. He laughed, then
began to speak in gibberish, reaching for a wineskin. So it was drink
after all. Szeth brushed by, continuing past a line of statues depicting
the Ten Heralds from ancient Vorin theology. Jezerezeh, Ishi, Kelek,
Talenelat. He counted off each one, and realized there were only nine
here. One was conspicuously missing. Why had Shalash’s statue been
removed? King Gavilar was said to be very devout in his Vorin worship.
Too devout, by some people’s standards.

The hallway here curved to the right, running around the perimeter of
the domed palace. They were on the king’s floor, two levels up,
surrounded by rock walls, ceiling, and floor. That was profane. Stone
was not to be trod upon. But what was he to do? He was Truthless. He did
as his masters demanded.

Today, that included wearing white. Loose white trousers tied at the
waist with a rope, and over them a filmy shirt with long sleeves, open
at the front. White clothing for a killer was a tradition among the
Parshendi. Although Szeth had not asked, his masters had explained why.

White to be bold. White to not blend into the night. White to give
warning.

For if you were going to assassinate a man, he was entitled to see you
coming.

Szeth turned right, taking the hallway directly toward the king’s
chambers. Torches burned on the walls, their light unsatisfying to him,
a meal of thin broth after a long fast. Tiny flamespren danced around
them, like insects made solely of congealed light. The torches were
useless to him. He reached for his pouch and the spheres it contained,
but then hesitated when he saw more of the blue lights ahead: a pair of
Stormlight lamps hanging on the wall, brilliant sapphires glowing at
their hearts. Szeth walked up to one of these, holding out his hand to
cup it around the glass-shrouded gemstone.

“You there!” a voice called in Alethi. There were two guards at the
intersection. Double guard, for there were savages abroad in Kholinar
this night. True, those savages were supposed to be allies now. But
alliances could be shallow things indeed.

This one wouldn’t last the hour.

Szeth looked as the two guards approached. They carried spears; they
weren’t lighteyes, and were therefore forbidden the sword. Their painted
red breastplates were ornate, however, as were their helms. They might
be darkeyed, but they were high-ranking citizens with honored positions
in the royal guard.

Stopping a few feet away, the guard at the front gestured with his
spear. “Go on, now. This is no place for you.” He had tan Alethi skin
and a thin mustache that ran all the way around his mouth, becoming a
beard at the bottom.

Szeth didn’t move.

“Well?” the guard said. “What are you waiting for?”

Szeth breathed in deeply, drawing forth the Stormlight. It streamed into
him, siphoned from the twin sapphire lamps on the walls, sucked in as if
by his deep inhalation. The Stormlight raged inside of him, and the
hallway suddenly grew darker, falling into shade like a hilltop cut off
from the sun by a transient cloud.

Szeth could feel the Light’s warmth, its fury, like a tempest that had
been injected directly into his veins. The power of it was invigorating
but dangerous. It pushed him to act. To move. To strike.

Holding his breath, he clung to the Stormlight. He could still feel it
leaking out. Stormlight could be held for only a short time, a few
minutes at most. It leaked away, the human body too porous a container.
He had heard that the Voidbringers could hold it in perfectly. But,
then, did they even exist? His punishment declared that they didn’t. His
honor demanded that they did.

Afire with holy energy, Szeth turned to the guards. They could see that
he was leaking Stormlight, wisps of it curling from his skin like
luminescent smoke. The lead guard squinted, frowning. Szeth was sure the
man had never seen anything like it before. As far as he knew, Szeth had
killed every stonewalker who had ever seen what he could do.

“What…what are you?” The guard’s voice had lost its certainty. “Spirit
or man?”

“What am I?” Szeth whispered, a bit of Light leaking from his lips as he
looked past the man down the long hallway. “I’m…sorry.”

Szeth blinked, Lashing himself to that distant point down the hallway.
Stormlight raged from him in a flash, chilling his skin, and the ground
immediately stopped pulling him downward. Instead, he was pulled toward
that distant point—it was as if, to him, that direction had suddenly
become down.

This was a Basic Lashing, first of his three kinds of Lashings. It gave
him the ability to manipulate whatever force, spren, or god it was that
held men to the ground. With this Lashing, he could bind people or
objects to different surfaces or in different directions.

From Szeth’s perspective, the hallway was now a deep shaft down which he
was falling, and the two guards stood on one of the sides. They were
shocked when Szeth’s feet hit them, one for each face, throwing them
over. Szeth shifted his view and Lashed himself to the floor. Light
leaked from him. The floor of the hallway again became down, and he
landed between the two guards, clothes crackling and dropping flakes of
frost. He rose, beginning the process of summoning his Shardblade.

One of the guards fumbled for his spear. Szeth reached down, touching
the soldier’s shoulder while looking up. He focused on a point above him
while willing the Light out of his body and into the guard, Lashing the
poor man to the ceiling.

The guard yelped in shock as up became down for him. Light trailing from
his form, he crashed into the ceiling and dropped his spear. It was not
Lashed directly, and clattered back down to the floor near Szeth.

To kill. It was the greatest of sins. And yet here Szeth stood,
Truthless, profanely walking on stones used for building. And it would
not end. As Truthless, there was only one life he was forbidden to take.

And that was his own.

At the tenth beat of his heart, his Shardblade dropped into his waiting
hand. It formed as if condensing from mist, water beading along the
metal length. His Shardblade was long and thin, edged on both sides,
smaller than most others. Szeth swept it out, carving a line in the
stone floor and passing through the second guard’s neck.

As always, the Shardblade killed oddly; though it cut easily through
stone, steel, or anything inanimate, the metal fuzzed when it touched
living skin. It traveled through the guard’s neck without leaving a
mark, but once it did, the man’s eyes smoked and burned. They blackened,
shriveling up in his head, and he slumped forward, dead. A Shardblade
did not cut living flesh; it severed the soul itself.

Above, the first guard gasped. He’d managed to get to his feet, even
though they were planted on the ceiling of the hallway. “Shardbearer!”
he shouted. “A Shardbearer assaults the king’s hall! To arms!”

Finally, Szeth thought. Szeth’s use of Stormlight was unfamiliar to the
guards, but they knew a Shardblade when they saw one.

Szeth bent down and picked up the spear that had fallen from above. As
he did so, he released the breath he’d been holding since drawing in the
Stormlight. It sustained him while he held it, but those two lanterns
hadn’t contained much of it, so he would need to breathe again soon. The
Light began to leak away more quickly, now that he wasn’t holding his
breath.

Szeth set the spear’s butt against the stone floor, then looked upward.
The guard above stopped shouting, eyes opening wide as the tails of his
shirt began to slip downward, the earth below reasserting its dominance.
The Light steaming off his body dwindled.

He looked down at Szeth. Down at the spear tip pointing directly at his
heart. Violet fearspren crawled out of the stone ceiling around him.

The Light ran out. The guard fell.

He screamed as he hit, the spear impaling him through the chest. Szeth
let the spear fall away, carried to the ground with a muffled thump by
the body twitching on its end. Shardblade in hand, he turned down a side
corridor, following the map he’d memorized. He ducked around a corner
and flattened himself against the wall just as a troop of guards reached
the dead men. The newcomers began shouting immediately, continuing the
alarm.

His instructions were clear. Kill the king, but be seen doing it. Let
the Alethi know he was coming and what he was doing. Why? Why did the
Parshendi agree to this treaty, only to send an assassin the very night
of its signing?

More gemstones glowed on the walls of the hallway here. King Gavilar
liked lavish display, and he couldn’t know that he was leaving sources
of power for Szeth to use in his Lashings. The things Szeth did hadn’t
been seen for millennia. Histories from those times were all but
nonexistent, and the legends were horribly inaccurate.

Szeth peeked back out into the corridor. One of the guards at the
intersection saw him, pointing and yelling. Szeth made sure they got a
good look, then ducked away. He took a deep breath as he ran, drawing in
Stormlight from the lanterns. His body came alive with it, and his speed
increased, his muscles bursting with energy. Light became a storm inside
of him; his blood thundered in his ears. It was terrible and wonderful
at the same time.

Two corridors down, one to the side. He threw open the door of a storage
room, then hesitated a moment—just long enough for a guard to round the
corner and see him—before dashing into the room. Preparing for a Full
Lashing, he raised his arm and commanded the Stormlight to pool there,
causing the skin to burst alight with radiance. Then he flung his hand
out toward the doorframe, spraying white luminescence across it like
paint. He slammed the door just as the guards arrived.

The Stormlight held the door in the frame with the strength of a hundred
arms. A Full Lashing bound objects together, holding them fast until the
Stormlight ran out. It took longer to create—and drained Stormlight far
more quickly—than a Basic Lashing. The door handle shook, and then the
wood began to crack as the guards threw their weight against it, one man
calling for an axe.

Szeth crossed the room in rapid strides, weaving around the shrouded
furniture that had been stored here. It was of red cloth and deep
expensive woods. He reached the far wall and—preparing himself for yet
another blasphemy—he raised his Shardblade and slashed horizontally
through the dark grey stone. The rock sliced easily; a Shardblade could
cut any inanimate object. Two vertical slashes followed, then one across
the bottom, cutting a large square block. He pressed his hand against
it, willing Stormlight into the stone.

Behind him the room’s door began to crack. He looked over his shoulder
and focused on the shaking door, Lashing the block in that direction.
Frost crystallized on his clothing—Lashing something so large required a
great deal of Stormlight. The tempest within him stilled, like a storm
reduced to a drizzle.

He stepped aside. The large stone block shuddered, sliding into the
room. Normally, moving the block would have been impossible. Its own
weight would have held it against the stones below. Yet now, that same
weight pulled it free; for the block, the direction of the room’s door
was down. With a deep grinding sound, the block slid free of the wall
and tumbled through the air, smashing furniture.

The soldiers finally broke through the door, staggering into the room
just as the enormous block crashed into them.

Szeth turned his back on the terrible sound of the screams, the
splintering of wood, the breaking of bones. He ducked and stepped
through his new hole, entering the hallway outside.

He walked slowly, drawing Stormlight from the lamps he passed, siphoning
it to him and stoking anew the tempest within. As the lamps dimmed, the
corridor darkened. A thick wooden door stood at the end, and as he
approached, small fearspren—shaped like globs of purple goo—began to
wriggle from the masonry, pointing toward the doorway. They were drawn
by the terror being felt on the other side.

Szeth pushed the door open, entering the last corridor leading to the
king’s chambers. Tall, red ceramic vases lined the pathway, and they
were interspersed with nervous soldiers. They flanked a long, narrow
rug. It was red, like a river of blood.

The spearmen in front didn’t wait for him to get close. They broke into
a trot, lifting their short throwing spears. Szeth slammed his hand to
the side, pushing Stormlight into the doorframe, using the third and
final type of Lashing, a Reverse Lashing. This one worked differently
from the other two. It did not make the doorframe emit Stormlight;
indeed, it seemed to pull nearby light into it, giving it a strange
penumbra.

The spearmen threw, and Szeth stood still, hand on the doorframe. A
Reverse Lashing required his constant touch, but took comparatively
little Stormlight. During one, anything that approached him—particularly
lighter objects—was instead pulled toward the Lashing itself.

The spears veered in the air, splitting around him and slamming into the
wooden frame. As he felt them hit, Szeth leaped into the air and Lashed
himself to the right wall, his feet hitting the stone with a slap.

He immediately reoriented his perspective. To his eyes, he wasn’t
standing on the wall, the soldiers were, the blood-red carpet streaming
between them like a long tapestry. Szeth bolted down the hallway,
striking with his Shardblade, shearing through the necks of two men who
had thrown spears at him. Their eyes burned, and they collapsed.

The other guards in the hallway began to panic. Some tried to attack
him, others yelled for more help, still others cringed away from him.
The attackers had trouble—they were disoriented by the oddity of
striking at someone who hung on the wall. Szeth cut down a few, then
flipped into the air, tucking into a roll, and Lashed himself back to
the floor.

He hit the ground in the midst of the soldiers. Completely surrounded,
but holding a Shardblade.

According to legend, the Shardblades were first carried by the Knights
Radiant uncounted ages ago. Gifts of their god, granted to allow them to
fight horrors of rock and flame, dozens of feet tall, foes whose eyes
burned with hatred. The Voidbringers. When your foe had skin as hard as
stone itself, steel was useless. Something supernal was required.

Szeth rose from his crouch, loose white clothes rippling, jaw clenched
against his sins. He struck out, his weapon flashing with reflected
torchlight. Elegant, wide swings. Three of them, one after another. He
could neither close his ears to the screams that followed nor avoid
seeing the men fall. They dropped round him like toys knocked over by a
child’s careless kick. If the Blade touched a man’s spine, he died, eyes
burning. If it cut through the core of a limb, it killed that limb. One
soldier stumbled away from Szeth, arm flopping uselessly on his
shoulder. He would never be able to feel it or use it again.

Szeth lowered his Shardblade, standing among the cinder-eyed corpses.
Here, in Alethkar, men often spoke of the legends—of mankind’s hard-won
victory over the Voidbringers. But when weapons created to fight
nightmares were turned against common soldiers, the lives of men became
cheap things indeed.

Szeth turned and continued on his way, slippered feet falling on the
soft red rug. The Shardblade, as always, glistened silver and clean.
When one killed with a Blade, there was no blood. That seemed like a
sign. The Shardblade was just a tool; it could not be blamed for the
murders.

The door at the end of the hallway burst open. Szeth froze as a small
group of soldiers rushed out, ushering a man in regal robes, his head
ducked as if to avoid arrows. The soldiers wore deep blue, the color of
the King’s Guard, and the corpses didn’t make them stop and gawk. They
were prepared for what a Shardbearer could do. They opened a side door
and shoved their ward through, several leveling spears at Szeth as they
backed out.

Another figure stepped from the king’s quarters; he wore glistening blue
armor made of smoothly interlocking plates. Unlike common plate armor,
however, this armor had no leather or mail visible at the joints—just
smaller plates, fitting together with intricate precision. The armor was
beautiful, the blue inlaid with golden bands around the edges of each
piece of plate, the helm ornamented with three waves of small, hornlike
wings.

Shardplate, the customary complement to a Shardblade. The newcomer
carried a sword as well, an enormous Shardblade six feet long with a
design along the blade like burning flames, a weapon of silvery metal
that gleamed and almost seemed to glow. A weapon designed to slay dark
gods, a larger counterpart to the one Szeth carried.

Szeth hesitated. He didn’t recognize the armor; he had not been warned
that he would be set at this task, and hadn’t been given proper time to
memorize the various suits of Plate or Blades owned by the Alethi. But a
Shardbearer would have to be dealt with before he chased the king; he
could not leave such a foe behind.

Besides, perhaps a Shardbearer could defeat him, kill him and end his
miserable life. His Lashings wouldn’t work directly on someone in
Shardplate, and the armor would enhance the man, strengthen him. Szeth’s
honor would not allow him to betray his mission or seek death. But if
that death occurred, he would welcome it.

The Shardbearer struck, and Szeth Lashed himself to the side of the
hallway, leaping with a twist and landing on the wall. He danced
backward, Blade held at the ready. The Shardbearer fell into an
aggressive posture, using one of the swordplay stances favored here in
the East. He moved far more nimbly than one would expect for a man in
such bulky armor. Shardplate was special, as ancient and magical as the
Blades it complemented.

The Shardbearer struck. Szeth skipped to the side and Lashed himself to
the ceiling as the Shardbearer’s Blade sliced into the wall. Feeling a
thrill at the contest, Szeth dashed forward and attacked downward with
an overhand blow, trying to hit the Shardbearer’s helm. The man ducked,
going down on one knee, letting Szeth’s Blade cleave empty air.

Szeth leaped backward as the Shardbearer swung upward with his Blade,
slicing into the ceiling. Szeth didn’t own a set of Plate himself, and
didn’t care to. His Lashings interfered with the gemstones that powered
Shardplate, and he had to choose one or the other.

As the Shardbearer turned, Szeth sprinted forward across the ceiling. As
expected, the Shardbearer swung again, and Szeth leaped to the side,
rolling. He came up from his roll and flipped, Lashing himself to the
floor again. He spun to land on the ground behind the Shardbearer. He
slammed his Blade into his opponent’s open back.

Unfortunately, there was one major advantage Plate offered: It could
block a Shardblade. Szeth’s weapon hit solidly, causing a web of glowing
lines to spread out across the back of the armor, and Stormlight began
to leak free from them. Shardplate didn’t dent or bend like common
metal. Szeth would have to hit the Shardbearer in the same location at
least once more to break through.

Szeth danced out of range as the Shardbearer swung in anger, trying to
cut at Szeth’s knees. The tempest within Szeth gave him many
advantages—including the ability to quickly recover from small wounds.
But it would not restore limbs killed by a Shardblade.

He rounded the Shardbearer, then picked a moment and dashed forward. The
Shardbearer swung again, but Szeth briefly Lashed himself to the ceiling
for lift. He shot into the air, cresting over the swing, then
immediately Lashed himself back to the floor. He struck as he landed,
but the Shardbearer recovered quickly and executed a perfect
follow-through stroke, coming within a finger of hitting Szeth.

The man was dangerously skilled with that Blade. Many Shardbearers
depended too much on the power of their weapon and armor. This man was
different.

Szeth jumped to the wall and struck at the Shardbearer with quick, terse
attacks, like a snapping eel. The Shardbearer fended him off with wide,
sweeping counters. His Blade’s length kept Szeth at bay.

This is taking too long! Szeth thought. If the king slipped away into
hiding, Szeth would fail in his mission no matter how many people he
killed. He ducked in for another strike, but the Shardbearer forced him
back. Each second this fight lasted was another for the king’s escape.

It was time to be reckless. Szeth launched into the air, Lashing himself
to the other end of the hallway and falling feet-first toward his
adversary. The Shardbearer didn’t hesitate to swing, but Szeth Lashed
himself down at an angle, dropping immediately. The Shardblade swished
through the air above him.

He landed in a crouch, using his momentum to throw himself forward, and
swung at the Shardbearer’s side, where the Plate had cracked. He hit
with a powerful blow. That piece of the Plate shattered, bits of molten
metal streaking away. The Shardbearer grunted, dropping to one knee,
raising a hand to his side. Szeth raised a foot to the man’s side and
shoved him backward with a Stormlight-enhanced kick.

The heavy Shardbearer crashed into the door of the king’s quarters,
smashing it and falling partway into the room beyond. Szeth left him,
ducking instead through the doorway to the right, following the way the
king had gone. The hallway here had the same red carpet, and Stormlight
lamps on the walls gave Szeth a chance to recharge the tempest within.

Energy blazed within him again, and he sped up. If he could get far
enough ahead, he could deal with the king, then turn back to fight off
the Shardbearer. It wouldn’t be easy. A Full Lashing on a doorway
wouldn’t stop a Shardbearer, and that Plate would let the man run
supernaturally fast. Szeth glanced over his shoulder.

The Shardbearer wasn’t following. The man sat up in his armor, looking
dazed. Szeth could just barely see him, sitting in the doorway,
surrounded by broken bits of wood. Perhaps Szeth had wounded him more
than he’d thought.

Or maybe…

Szeth froze. He thought of the ducked head of the man who’d been rushed
out, face obscured. The Shardbearer still wasn’t following. He was so
skilled. It was said that few men could rival Gavilar Kholin’s
swordsmanship. Could it be?

Szeth turned and dashed back, trusting his instincts. As soon as the
Shardbearer saw him, he climbed to his feet with alacrity. Szeth ran
faster. What was the safest place for your king? In the hands of some
guards, fleeing? Or protected in a suit of Shardplate, left behind,
dismissed as a bodyguard?

Clever, Szeth thought as the formerly sluggish Shardbearer fell into
another battle stance. Szeth attacked with renewed vigor, swinging his
Blade in a flurry of strikes. The Shardbearer—the king—aggressively
struck out with broad, sweeping blows. Szeth pulled away from one of
these, feeling the wind of the weapon passing just inches before him. He
timed his next move, then dashed forward, ducking underneath the king’s
follow-through.

The king, expecting another strike at his side, twisted with his arm
held protectively to block the hole in his Plate. That gave Szeth the
room to run past him and into the king’s chambers.

The king spun around to follow, but Szeth ran through the lavishly
furnished chamber, flinging out his hand, touching pieces of furniture
he passed. He infused them with Stormlight, Lashing them to a point
behind the king. The furniture tumbled as if the room had been turned on
its side, couches, chairs, and tables dropping toward the surprised
king. Gavilar made the mistake of chopping at them with his Shardblade.
The weapon easily sheared through a large couch, but the pieces still
crashed into him, making him stumble. A footstool hit him next, throwing
him to the ground.

Gavilar rolled out of the way of the furniture and charged forward,
Plate leaking streams of Light from the cracked sections. Szeth gathered
himself, then leaped into the air, Lashing himself backward and to the
right as the king arrived. He zipped out of the way of the king’s blow,
then Lashed himself forward with two Basic Lashings in a row. Stormlight
flashed out of him, clothing freezing, as he was pulled toward the king
at twice the speed of a normal fall.

The king’s posture indicated surprise as Szeth lurched in midair, then
spun toward him, swinging. He slammed his Blade into the king’s helm,
then immediately Lashed himself to the ceiling and fell upward, slamming
into the stone roof above. He’d Lashed himself in too many directions
too quickly, and his body had lost track, making it difficult to land
gracefully. He stumbled back to his feet.

Below, the king stepped back, trying to get into position to swing up at
Szeth. The man’s helm was cracked, leaking Stormlight, and he stood
protectively, defending the side with the broken plate. The king used a
one-handed swing, reaching for the ceiling. Szeth immediately Lashed
himself downward, judging that the king’s attack would leave him unable
to get his sword back in time.

Szeth underestimated his opponent. The king stepped into Szeth’s attack,
trusting his helm to absorb the blow. Just as Szeth hit the helm a
second time—shattering it—Gavilar punched with his off hand, slamming
his gauntleted fist into Szeth’s face.

Blinding light flashed in Szeth’s eyes, a counterpoint to the sudden
agony that crashed across his face. Everything blurred, his vision
fading.

Pain. So much pain!

He screamed, Stormlight leaving him in a rush, and he slammed back into
something hard. The balcony doors. More pain broke out across his
shoulders, as if someone had stabbed him with a hundred daggers, and he
hit the ground and rolled to a stop, muscles trembling. The blow would
have killed an ordinary man.

No time for pain. No time for pain. No time for pain!

He blinked, shaking his head, the world blurry and dark. Was he blind?
No. It was dark outside. He was on the wooden balcony; the force of the
blow had thrown him through the doors. Something was thumping. Heavy
footfalls. The Shardbearer!

Szeth stumbled to his feet, vision swimming. Blood streamed from the
side of his face, and Stormlight rose from his skin, blinding his left
eye. The Light. It would heal him, if it could. His jaw felt unhinged.
Broken? He’d dropped his Shardblade.

A lumbering shadow moved in front of him; the Shardbearer’s armor had
leaked enough Stormlight that the king was having trouble walking. But
he was coming.

Szeth screamed, kneeling, infusing Stormlight into the wooden balcony,
Lashing it downward. The air frosted around him. The tempest roared,
traveling down his arms into the wood. He Lashed it downward, then did
it again. He Lashed a fourth time as Gavilar stepped onto the balcony.
It lurched under the extra weight. The wood cracked, straining.

The Shardbearer hesitated.

Szeth Lashed the balcony downward a fifth time. The balcony supports
shattered and the entire structure broke free from the building. Szeth
screamed through a broken jaw and used his final bit of Stormlight to
Lash himself to the side of the building. He fell to the side, passing
the shocked Shardbearer, then hit the wall and rolled.

The balcony dropped away, the king looking up with shock as he lost his
footing. The fall was brief. In the moonlight, Szeth watched
solemnly—vision still fuzzy, blinded in one eye—as the structure crashed
to the stone ground below. The wall of the palace trembled, and the
crash of broken wood echoed from the nearby buildings.

Still standing on the side of the wall, Szeth groaned, climbing to his
feet. He felt weak; he’d used up his Stormlight too quickly, straining
his body. He stumbled down the side of the building, approaching the
wreckage, barely able to remain standing.

The king was still moving. Shardplate would protect a man from such a
fall, but a large length of bloodied wood stuck up through Gavilar’s
side, piercing him where Szeth had broken the Plate earlier. Szeth knelt
down, inspecting the man’s pain-wracked face. Strong features, square
chin, black beard flecked with white, striking pale green eyes. Gavilar
Kholin.

“I…expected you…to come,” the king said between gasps.

Szeth reached underneath the front of the man’s breastplate, tapping the
straps there. They unfastened, and he pulled the front of the
breastplate free, exposing the gemstones on its interior. Two had been
cracked and burned out. Three still glowed. Numb, Szeth breathed in
sharply, absorbing the Light.

The storm began to rage again. More Light rose from the side of his
face, repairing his damaged skin and bones. The pain was still great;
Stormlight healing was far from instantaneous. It would be hours before
he recovered.

The king coughed. “You can tell…Thaidakar…that he’s too late….”

“I don’t know who that is,” Szeth said, standing, his words slurring
from his broken jaw. He held his hand to the side, resummoning his
Shardblade.

The king frowned. “Then who…? Restares? Sadeas? I never thought…”

“My masters are the Parshendi,” Szeth said. Ten heartbeats passed, and
his Blade dropped into his hand, wet with condensation.

“The Parshendi? That makes no sense.” Gavilar coughed, hand quivering,
reaching toward his chest and fumbling at a pocket. He pulled out a
small crystalline sphere tied to a chain. “You must take this. They must
not get it.” He seemed dazed. “Tell…tell my brother…he must find the
most important words a man can say….”

Gavilar fell still.

Szeth hesitated, then knelt down and took the sphere. It was odd, unlike
any he’d seen before. Though it was completely dark, it seemed to glow
somehow. With a light that was black.

The Parshendi? Gavilar had said. That makes no sense.

“Nothing makes sense anymore,” Szeth whispered, tucking the strange
sphere away. “It’s all unraveling. I am sorry, King of the Alethi. I
doubt that you care. Not anymore, at least.” He stood up. “At least you
won’t have to watch the world ending with the rest of us.”

Beside the king’s body, his Shardblade materialized from mist,
clattering to the stones now that its master was dead. It was worth a
fortune; kingdoms had fallen as men vied to possess a single Shardblade.

Shouts of alarm came from inside the palace. Szeth needed to go. But…

Tell my brother…

To Szeth’s people, a dying request was sacred. He took the king’s hand,
dipping it in the man’s own blood, then used it to scrawl on the wood,
Brother. You must find the most important words a man can say.

With that, Szeth escaped into the night. He left the king’s Shardblade;
he had no use for it. The Blade Szeth already carried was curse enough.

  “You’ve killed me. Bastards, you’ve killed me! While the sun is still
  hot, I die!”

  —Collected on the fifth day of the week Chach of the month Betab of
  the year 1171, ten seconds before death. Subject was a darkeyed
  soldier thirty-one years of age. Sample is considered questionable.

FIVE YEARS LATER

“I’m going to die, aren’t I?” Cenn asked.

The weathered veteran beside Cenn turned and inspected him. The veteran
wore a full beard, cut short. At the sides, the black hairs were
starting to give way to grey.

I’m going to die, Cenn thought, clutching his spear—the shaft slick with
sweat. I’m going to die. Oh, Stormfather. I’m going to die….

“How old are you, son?” the veteran asked. Cenn didn’t remember the
man’s name. It was hard to recall anything while watching that other
army form lines across the rocky battlefield. That lining up seemed so
civil. Neat, organized. Shortspears in the front ranks, longspears and
javelins next, archers at the sides. The darkeyed spearmen wore
equipment like Cenn’s: leather jerkin and knee-length skirt with a
simple steel cap and a matching breastplate.

Many of the lighteyes had full suits of armor. They sat astride horses,
their honor guards clustering around them with breastplates that gleamed
burgundy and deep forest green. Were there Shardbearers among them?
Brightlord Amaram wasn’t a Shardbearer. Were any of his men? What if
Cenn had to fight one? Ordinary men didn’t kill Shardbearers. It had
happened so infrequently that each occurrence was now legendary.

It’s really happening, he thought with mounting terror. This wasn’t a
drill in the camp. This wasn’t training out in the fields, swinging
sticks. This was real. Facing that fact—his heart pounding like a
frightened animal in his chest, his legs unsteady—Cenn suddenly realized
that he was a coward. He shouldn’t have left the herds! He should never
have—

“Son?” the veteran said, voice firm. “How old are you?”

“Fifteen, sir.”

“And what’s your name?”

“Cenn, sir.”

The mountainous, bearded man nodded. “I’m Dallet.”

“Dallet,” Cenn repeated, still staring out at the other army. There were
so many of them! Thousands. “I’m going to die, aren’t I?”

“No.” Dallet had a gruff voice, but somehow that was comforting. “You’re
going to be just fine. Keep your head on straight. Stay with the squad.”

“But I’ve barely had three months’ training!” He swore he could hear
faint clangs from the enemy’s armor or shields. “I can barely hold this
spear! Stormfather, I’m dead. I can’t—”

“Son,” Dallet interrupted, soft but firm. He raised a hand and placed it
on Cenn’s shoulder. The rim of Dallet’s large round shield reflected the
light from where it hung on his back. “You are going to be fine.”

“How can you know?” It came out as a plea.

“Because, lad. You’re in Kaladin Stormblessed’s squad.” The other
soldiers nearby nodded in agreement.

Behind them, waves and waves of soldiers were lining up—thousands of
them. Cenn was right at the front, with Kaladin’s squad of about thirty
other men. Why had Cenn been moved to a new squad at the last moment? It
had something to do with camp politics.

Why was this squad at the very front, where casualties were bound to be
the greatest? Small fearspren—like globs of purplish goo—began to climb
up out of the ground and gather around his feet. In a moment of sheer
panic, he nearly dropped his spear and scrambled away. Dallet’s hand
tightened on his shoulder. Looking up into Dallet’s confident black
eyes, Cenn hesitated.

“Did you piss before we formed ranks?” Dallet asked.

“I didn’t have time to—”

“Go now.”

“Here?”

“If you don’t, you’ll end up with it running down your leg in battle,
distracting you, maybe killing you. Do it.”

Embarrassed, Cenn handed Dallet his spear and relieved himself onto the
stones. When he finished, he shot glances at those next to him. None of
Kaladin’s soldiers smirked. They stood steady, spears to their sides,
shields on their backs.

The enemy army was almost finished. The field between the two forces was
bare, flat slickrock, remarkably even and smooth, broken only by
occasional rockbuds. It would have made a good pasture. The warm wind
blew in Cenn’s face, thick with the watery scents of last night’s
highstorm.

“Dallet!” a voice said.

A man walked up through the ranks, carrying a shortspear that had two
leather knife sheaths strapped to the haft. The newcomer was a young
man—perhaps four years older than Cenn’s fifteen—but he was taller by
several fingers than even Dallet. He wore the common leathers of a
spearman, but under them was a pair of dark trousers. That wasn’t
supposed to be allowed.

His black Alethi hair was shoulder-length and wavy, his eyes a dark
brown. He also had knots of white cord on the shoulders of his jerkin,
marking him as a squadleader.

The thirty men around Cenn snapped to attention, raising their spears in
salute. This is Kaladin Stormblessed? Cenn thought incredulously. This
youth?

“Dallet, we’re soon going to have a new recruit,” Kaladin said. He had a
strong voice. “I need you to…” He trailed off as he noticed Cenn.

“He found his way here just a few minutes ago, sir,” Dallet said with a
smile. “I’ve been gettin’ him ready.”

“Well done,” Kaladin said. “I paid good money to get that boy away from
Gare. That man’s so incompetent he might as well be fighting for the
other side.”

What? Cenn thought. Why would anyone pay to get me?

“What do you think about the field?” Kaladin asked. Several of the other
spearmen nearby raised hands to shade from the sun, scanning the rocks.

“That dip next to the two boulders on the far right?” Dallet asked.

Kaladin shook his head. “Footing’s too rough.”

“Aye. Perhaps it is. What about the short hill over there? Far enough to
avoid the first fall, close enough to not get too far ahead.”

Kaladin nodded, though Cenn couldn’t see what they were looking at.
“Looks good.”

“The rest of you louts hear that?” Dallet shouted.

The men raised their spears high.

“Keep an eye on the new boy, Dallet,” Kaladin said. “He won’t know the
signs.”

“Of course,” Dallet said, smiling. Smiling! How could the man smile? The
enemy army was blowing horns. Did that mean they were ready? Even though
Cenn had just relieved himself, he felt a trickle of urine run down his
leg.

“Stay firm,” Kaladin said, then trotted down the front line to talk to
the next squadleader over. Behind Cenn and the others, the dozens of
ranks were still growing. The archers on the sides prepared to fire.

“Don’t worry, son,” Dallet said. “We’ll be fine. Squadleader Kaladin is
lucky.”

The soldier on the other side of Cenn nodded. He was a lanky, red-haired
Veden, with darker tan skin than the Alethi. Why was he fighting in an
Alethi army? “That’s right. Kaladin, he’s stormblessed, right sure he
is. We only lost…what, one man last battle?”

“But someone did die,” Cenn said.

Dallet shrugged. “People always die. Our squad loses the fewest. You’ll
see.”

Kaladin finished conferring with the other squadleader, then jogged back
to his team. Though he carried a shortspear—meant to be wielded
one-handed with a shield in the other hand—his was a hand longer than
those held by the other men.

“At the ready, men!” Dallet called. Unlike the other squadleaders,
Kaladin didn’t fall into rank, but stood out in front of his squad.

The men around Cenn shuffled, excited. The sounds were repeated through
the vast army, the stillness giving way before eagerness. Hundreds of
feet shuffling, shields slapping, clasps clanking. Kaladin remained
motionless, staring down the other army. “Steady, men,” he said without
turning.

Behind, a lighteyed officer passed on horseback. “Be ready to fight! I
want their blood, men. Fight and kill!”

“Steady,” Kaladin said again, after the man passed.

“Be ready to run,” Dallet said to Cenn.

“Run? But we’ve been trained to march in formation! To stay in our
line!”

“Sure,” Dallet said. “But most of the men don’t have much more training
than you. Those who can fight well end up getting sent to the Shattered
Plains to battle the Parshendi. Kaladin’s trying to get us into shape to
go there, to fight for the king.” Dallet nodded down the line. “Most of
these here will break and charge; the lighteyes aren’t good enough
commanders to keep them in formation. So stay with us and run.”

“Should I have my shield out?” Around Kaladin’s team, the other ranks
were unhooking their shields. But Kaladin’s squad left their shields on
their backs.

Before Dallet could answer, a horn blew from behind.

“Go!” Dallet said.

Cenn didn’t have much choice. The entire army started moving in a clamor
of marching boots. As Dallet had predicted, the steady march didn’t last
long. Some men began yelling, the roar taken up by others. Lighteyes
called for them to go, run, fight. The line disintegrated.

As soon as that happened, Kaladin’s squad broke into a dash, running out
into the front at full speed. Cenn scrambled to keep up, panicked and
terrified. The ground wasn’t as smooth as it had seemed, and he nearly
tripped on a hidden rockbud, vines withdrawn into its shell.

He righted himself and kept going, holding his spear in one hand, his
shield clapping against his back. The distant army was in motion as
well, their soldiers charging down the field. There was no semblance of
a battle formation or a careful line. This wasn’t anything like the
training had claimed it would be.

Cenn didn’t even know who the enemy was. A landlord was encroaching on
Brightlord Amaram’s territory—the land owned, ultimately, by Highprince
Sadeas. It was a border skirmish, and Cenn thought it was with another
Alethi princedom. Why were they fighting each other? Perhaps the king
would have put a stop to it, but he was on the Shattered Plains, seeking
vengeance for the murder of King Gavilar five years before.

The enemy had a lot of archers. Cenn’s panic climbed to a peak as the
first wave of arrows flew into the air. He stumbled again, itching to
take out his shield. But Dallet grabbed his arm and yanked him forward.

Hundreds of arrows split the sky, dimming the sun. They arced and fell,
dropping like skyeels upon their prey. Amaram’s soldiers raised shields.
But not Kaladin’s squad. No shields for them.

Cenn screamed.

And the arrows slammed into the middle ranks of Amaram’s army, behind
him. Cenn glanced over his shoulder, still running. The arrows fell
behind him. Soldiers screamed, arrows broke against shields; only a few
straggling arrows landed anywhere near the front ranks.

“Why?” he yelled at Dallet. “How did you know?”

“They want the arrows to hit where the men are most crowded,” the large
man replied. “Where they’ll have the greatest chance of finding a body.”

Several other groups in the van left their shields lowered, but most ran
awkwardly with their shields angled up to the sky, worried about arrows
that wouldn’t hit them. That slowed them, and they risked getting
trampled by the men behind who were getting hit. Cenn itched to raise
his shield anyway; it felt so wrong to run without it.

The second volley hit, and men screamed in pain. Kaladin’s squad
barreled toward the enemy soldiers, some of whom were dying to arrows
from Amaram’s archers. Cenn could hear the enemy soldiers bellowing war
cries, could make out individual faces. Suddenly, Kaladin’s squad pulled
to a halt, forming a tight group. They’d reached the small incline that
Kaladin and Dallet had chosen earlier.

Dallet grabbed Cenn and shoved him to the very center of the formation.
Kaladin’s men lowered spears, pulling out shields as the enemy bore down
on them. The charging foe used no careful formation; they didn’t keep
the ranks of longspears in back and shortspears in front. They all just
ran forward, yelling in a frenzy.

Cenn scrambled to get his shield unlatched from his back. Clashing
spears rang in the air as squads engaged one another. A group of enemy
spearmen rushed up to Kaladin’s squad, perhaps coveting the higher
ground. The three dozen attackers had some cohesion, though they weren’t
in as tight a formation as Kaladin’s squad was.

The enemy seemed determined to make up for it in passion; they bellowed
and screamed in fury, rushing Kaladin’s line. Kaladin’s team held rank,
defending Cenn as if he were some lighteyes and they were his honor
guard. The two forces met with a crash of metal on wood, shields
slamming together. Cenn cringed back.

It was over in a few eyeblinks. The enemy squad pulled back, leaving two
dead on the stone. Kaladin’s team hadn’t lost anyone. They held their
bristling V formation, though one man stepped back and pulled out a
bandage to wrap a thigh wound. The rest of the men closed in to fill the
spot. The wounded man was hulking and thick-armed; he cursed, but the
wound didn’t look bad. He was on his feet in a moment, but didn’t return
to the place where he’d been. Instead, he moved down to one end of the V
formation, a more protected spot.

The battlefield was chaos. The two armies mingled indistinguishably;
sounds of clanging, crunching, and screaming churned in the air. Many
of the squads broke apart, members rushing from one encounter to
another. They moved like hunters, groups of three or four seeking lone
individuals, then brutally falling on them.

Kaladin’s team held its ground, engaging only enemy squads that got too
close. Was this what a battle really was? Cenn’s practice had trained
him for long ranks of men, shoulder to shoulder. Not this frenzied
intermixing, this brutal pandemonium. Why didn’t more hold formation?

The real soldiers are all gone, Cenn thought. Off fighting in a real
battle at the Shattered Plains. No wonder Kaladin wants to get his squad
there.

Spears flashed on all sides; it was difficult to tell friend from foe,
despite the emblems on breastplates and colored paint on shields. The
battlefield broke down into hundreds of small groups, like a thousand
different wars happening at the same time.

After the first few exchanges, Dallet took Cenn by the shoulder and
placed him in the rank at the very bottom of the V pattern. Cenn,
however, was worthless. When Kaladin’s team engaged enemy squads, all of
his training fled him. It took everything he had to just remain there,
holding his spear outward and trying to look threatening.

For the better part of an hour, Kaladin’s squad held their small hill,
working as a team, shoulder to shoulder. Kaladin often left his position
at the front, rushing this way and that, banging his spear on his shield
in a strange rhythm.

Those are signals, Cenn realized as Kaladin’s squad moved from the V
shape into a ring. With the screams of the dying and the thousands of
men calling to others, it was nearly impossible to hear a single
person’s voice. But the sharp clang of the spear against the metal plate
on Kaladin’s shield was clear. Each time they changed formations, Dallet
grabbed Cenn by the shoulder and steered him.

Kaladin’s team didn’t chase down stragglers. They remained on the
defensive. And, while several of the men in Kaladin’s team took wounds,
none of them fell. Their squad was too intimidating for the smaller
groups, and larger enemy units retreated after a few exchanges, seeking
easier foes.

Eventually something changed. Kaladin turned, watching the tides of the
battle with discerning brown eyes. He raised his spear and smacked his
shield in a quick rhythm he hadn’t used before. Dallet grabbed Cenn by
the arm and pulled him away from the small hill. Why abandon it now?

Just then, the larger body of Amaram’s force broke, the men scattering.
Cenn hadn’t realized how poorly the battle in this quarter had been
going for his side. As Kaladin’s team retreated, they passed many
wounded and dying, and Cenn grew nauseated. Soldiers were sliced open,
their insides spilling out.

He didn’t have time for horror; the retreat quickly turned into a rout.
Dallet cursed, and Kaladin beat his shield again. The squad changed
direction, heading eastward. There, Cenn saw, a larger group of Amaram’s
soldiers was holding.

But the enemy had seen the ranks break, and that made them bold. They
rushed forward in clusters, like wild axehounds hunting stray hogs.
Before Kaladin’s team was halfway across the field of dead and dying, a
large group of enemy soldiers intercepted them. Kaladin reluctantly
banged his shield; his squad slowed.

Cenn felt his heart begin to thump faster and faster. Nearby, a squad of
Amaram’s soldiers was consumed; men stumbled and fell, screaming, trying
to get away. The enemies used their spears like skewers, killing men on
the ground like cremlings.

Kaladin’s men met the enemy in a crash of spears and shields. Bodies
shoved on all sides, and Cenn was spun about. In the jumble of friend
and foe, dying and killing, Cenn grew overwhelmed. So many men running
in so many directions!

He panicked, scrambling for safety. A group of soldiers nearby wore
Alethi uniforms. Kaladin’s squad. Cenn ran for them, but when some
turned toward him, Cenn was terrified to realize he didn’t recognize
them. This wasn’t Kaladin’s squad, but a small group of unfamiliar
soldiers holding an uneven, broken line. Wounded and terrified, they
scattered as soon as an enemy squad got close.

Cenn froze, holding his spear in a sweaty hand. The enemy soldiers
charged right for him. His instincts urged him to flee, yet he had seen
so many men picked off one at a time. He had to stand! He had to face
them! He couldn’t run, he couldn’t—

He yelled, stabbing his spear at the lead soldier. The man casually
knocked the weapon aside with his shield, then drove his shortspear into
Cenn’s thigh. The pain was hot, so hot that the blood squirting out on
his leg felt cold by comparison. Cenn gasped.

The soldier yanked the weapon free. Cenn stumbled backward, dropping his
spear and shield. He fell to rocky ground, splashing in someone else’s
blood. His foe raised a spear high, a looming silhouette against the
stark blue sky, ready to ram it into Cenn’s heart.

And then he was there.

Squadleader. Stormblessed. Kaladin’s spear came as if out of nowhere,
narrowly deflecting the blow that was to have killed Cenn. Kaladin set
himself in front of Cenn, alone, facing down six spearmen. He didn’t
flinch. He charged.

It happened so quickly. Kaladin swept the feet from beneath the man who
had stabbed Cenn. Even as that man fell, Kaladin reached up and flipped
a knife from one of the sheaths tied about his spear. His hand snapped,
knife flashing and hitting the thigh of a second foe. That man fell to
one knee, screaming.

A third man froze, looking at his fallen allies. Kaladin shoved past a
wounded enemy and slammed his spear into the gut of the third man. A
fourth man fell with a knife to the eye. When had Kaladin grabbed that
knife? He spun between the last two, his spear a blur, wielding it like
a quarterstaff. For a moment, Cenn thought he could see something
surrounding the squadleader. A warping of the air, like the wind itself
become visible.

I’ve lost a lot of blood. It’s flowing out so quickly….

Kaladin spun, knocking aside attacks, and the last two spearmen fell
with gurgles that Cenn thought sounded surprised. Foes all down, Kaladin
turned and knelt beside Cenn. The squadleader set aside his spear and
whipped a white strip of cloth from his pocket, then efficiently wrapped
it tight around Cenn’s leg. Kaladin worked with the ease of one who had
bound wounds dozens of times before.

“Kaladin, sir!” Cenn said, pointing at one of the soldiers Kaladin had
wounded. The enemy man held his leg as he stumbled to his feet. In a
second, however, mountainous Dallet was there, shoving the foe with his
shield. Dallet didn’t kill the wounded man, but let him stumble away,
unarmed.

The rest of the squad arrived and formed a ring around Kaladin, Dallet,
and Cenn. Kaladin stood up, raising his spear to his shoulder; Dallet
handed him back his knives, retrieved from the fallen foes.

“Had me worried there, sir,” Dallet said. “Running off like that.”

“I knew you’d follow,” Kaladin said. “Raise the red banner. Cyn,
Korater, you’re going back with the boy. Dallet, hold here. Amaram’s
line is bulging in this direction. We should be safe soon.”

“And you, sir?” Dallet asked.

Kaladin looked across the field. A pocket had opened in the enemy
forces, and a man rode there on a white horse, swinging about him with a
wicked mace. He wore full plate armor, polished and gleaming silver.

“A Shardbearer,” Cenn said.

Dallet snorted. “No, thank the Stormfather. Just a lighteyed officer.
Shardbearers are far too valuable to waste on a minor border dispute.”

Kaladin watched the lighteyes with a seething hatred. It was the same
hatred Cenn’s father had shown when he’d spoken of chull rustlers, or
the hatred Cenn’s mother would display when someone mentioned Kusiri,
who had run off with the cobbler’s son.

“Sir?” Dallet said hesitantly.

“Subsquads Two and Three, pincer pattern,” Kaladin said, his voice hard.
“We’re taking a brightlord off his throne.”

“You sure that’s wise, sir? We’ve got wounded.”

Kaladin turned toward Dallet. “That’s one of Hallaw’s officers. He might
be the one.”

“You don’t know that, sir.”

“Regardless, he’s a battalionlord. If we kill an officer that high,
we’re all but guaranteed to be in the next group sent to the Shattered
Plains. We’re taking him.” His eyes grew distant. “Imagine it, Dallet.
Real soldiers. A warcamp with discipline and lighteyes with integrity. A
place where our fighting will mean something.”

Dallet sighed, but nodded. Kaladin waved to a group of his soldiers;
then they raced across the field. A smaller group of soldiers, including
Dallet, waited behind with the wounded. One of those—a thin man with
black Alethi hair speckled with a handful of blond hairs, marking some
foreign blood—pulled a long red ribbon from his pocket and attached it
to his spear. He held the spear aloft, letting the ribbon flap in the
wind.

“It’s a call for runners to carry our wounded off the field,” Dallet
said to Cenn. “We’ll have you out of here soon. You were brave, standing
against those six.”

“Fleeing seemed stupid,” Cenn said, trying to take his mind off his
throbbing leg. “With so many wounded on the field, how can we think that
the runners’ll come for us?”

“Squadleader Kaladin bribes them,” Dallet said. “They usually only carry
off lighteyes, but there are more runners than there are wounded
lighteyes. The squadleader puts most of his pay into the bribes.”

“This squad is different,” Cenn said, feeling light-headed.

“Told you.”

“Not because of luck. Because of training.”

“That’s part of it. Part of it is because we know if we get hurt,
Kaladin will get us off the battlefield.” He paused, looking over his
shoulder. As Kaladin had predicted, Amaram’s line was surging back,
recovering.

The mounted enemy lighteyes from before was energetically laying about
with his mace. A group of his honor guard moved to one side, engaging
Kaladin’s subsquads. The lighteyes turned his horse. He wore an
open-fronted helm that had sloping sides and a large set of plumes on
the top. Cenn couldn’t make out his eye color, but he knew it would be
blue or green, maybe yellow or light grey. He was a brightlord, chosen
at birth by the Heralds, marked for rule.

He impassively regarded those who fought nearby. Then one of Kaladin’s
knives took him in the right eye.

The brightlord screamed, falling back off the saddle as Kaladin somehow
slipped through the lines and leaped upon him, spear raised.

“Aye, it’s part training,” Dallet said, shaking his head. “But it’s
mostly him. He fights like a storm, that one, and thinks twice as fast
as other men. The way he moves sometimes…”

“He bound my leg,” Cenn said, realizing he was beginning to speak
nonsense due to the blood loss. Why point out the bound leg? It was a
simple thing.

Dallet just nodded. “He knows a lot about wounds. He can read glyphs
too. He’s a strange man, for a lowly darkeyed spearman, our squadleader
is.” He turned to Cenn. “But you should save your strength, son. The
squadleader won’t be pleased if we lose you, not after what he paid to
get you.”

“Why?” Cenn asked. The battlefield was growing quieter, as if many of
the dying men had already yelled themselves hoarse. Almost everyone
around them was an ally, but Dallet still watched to make sure no enemy
soldiers tried to strike at Kaladin’s wounded.

“Why, Dallet?” Cenn repeated, feeling urgent. “Why bring me into his
squad? Why me?”

Dallet shook his head. “It’s just how he is. Hates the thought of young
kids like you, barely trained, going to battle. Every now and again, he
grabs one and brings him into his squad. A good half dozen of our men
were once like you.” Dallet’s eyes got a far-off look. “I think you all
remind him of someone.”

Cenn glanced at his leg. Painspren—like small orange hands with overly
long fingers—were crawling around him, reacting to his agony. They began
turning away, scurrying in other directions, seeking other wounded. His
pain was fading, his leg—his whole body—feeling numb.

He leaned back, staring up at the sky. He could hear faint thunder. That
was odd. The sky was cloudless.

Dallet cursed.

Cenn turned, shocked out of his stupor. Galloping directly toward them
was a massive black horse bearing a rider in gleaming armor that seemed
to radiate light. That armor was seamless—no chain underneath, just
smaller plates, incredibly intricate. The figure wore an unornamented
full helm, and the plate was gilded. He carried a massive sword in one
hand, fully as long as a man was tall. It wasn’t a simple, straight
sword—it was curved, and the side that wasn’t sharp was ridged, like
flowing waves. Etchings covered its length.

It was beautiful. Like a work of art. Cenn had never seen a Shardbearer,
but he knew immediately what this was. How could he ever have mistaken a
simple armored lighteyes for one of these majestic creatures?

Hadn’t Dallet claimed there would be no Shardbearers on this
battlefield? Dallet scrambled to his feet, calling for the subsquad to
form up. Cenn just sat where he was. He couldn’t have stood, not with
that leg wound.

He felt so light-headed. How much blood had he lost? He could barely
think.

Either way, he couldn’t fight. You didn’t fight something like this. Sun
gleamed against that plate armor. And that gorgeous, intricate, sinuous
sword. It was like…like the Almighty himself had taken form to walk the
battlefield.

And why would you want to fight the Almighty?

Cenn closed his eyes.

<s>[INST] What did Kalak see when he rounded the stone ridge? [/INST] Kalak saw the body of a dying thunderclast, 
a creature that seemed skeletal in shape, with unnaturally long limbs and eyes that were red spots on its arrowhead face.
A thunderclast's hand was as long as a man's height. </s>

<s>[INST] Quien era la persona a la que se llamaba "Rey de los Heraldos" [/INST] El "Rey de los Heraldos" era Jezrien, un hombre que
a pesar de los siglos aún parecía estar entrando en sus treinta años. Jezrien tenia cabello negro corto y una barba muy cuidada y recortada.
Él también era un rey antes de convertirse en un Heraldo. </s>

<s>[INST] What was the power of the Dustbringers? [/INST] The Dustbringers seemed to have a power that was able to burn or disintegrate matter, although it is not
fully explained.  </s>

<s>[INST] Como eran las armas que dejaron atras Kalak, Jezrien y sus aliados? [/INST] Estas armas eran espadas, descriptas como
extremadamente poderosas, con diseños hermosos e intrincados, casi obras de arte. Cada una era unica y tenia inscriptos glifos y patrones.
Se dice que estas espadas eran incluso mas poderosas que las Espadas Esquirladas comunes. </s>

<s>[INST] Who was the person left behind by Jezrien, Kalak and the other Heralds at the last Desolation? [/INST] This abandoned person was
Talenel, also known as "Taln", another Herald. </s>

<s>[INST] Where was Taln when he was abandoned? [/INST] It is not explicitly cited where Talenel was when he was abandoned by the other 9 Heralds,
but it is described as a place of nightmares, fire and pain. </s>